Brian Spears:
There's a global
race on taking that compute technology that we've
built here in the US and doing transformational
things with it. There are adversaries in the
world, especially China, who have declared that
they will dominate in the AI space by 2030. The
National Security Commission on AI took a hard
look at this around 2021 to 2022. And they said
in this global scale, there were six structural
features that they looked at and most players
in the world could not compete with the US,
save China. China's ahead in half the features;
the US is ahead in half the features. Who wins
is a toss-up. So the Department of Energy has
stepped up and said [We know how to do computing
at an enormous scale, we understand what the
national security needs are for the country;
we're in a unique position to bring together the
compute capability and that awareness of those
missions, and put it together and do something
productive]. So FAST is the answer to that.
Craig Smith:
Hi, I wanted to jump in and give a shout-out
to our sponsor, SysAid. SysAid's vision is to
lead organizations on a transformative journey
toward AI-driven organizational processes and
services, infusing intelligence and ease in the
workday with SysAid Copilot. SysAid orchestrates
service management across the organization using
generative AI that taps into specialized data
accumulated from thousands of customers and
millions of users. With zero setup required,
SysAid's conversational AI manages employees'
requests, assists with queries, and accelerates
the resolution of issues. IT pros and service
management leaders become pioneers, enabling
productivity to thrive. Now, employees can
do what they're meant to do and organizations are
free to fulfill their purpose. Give SysAid a try.
Brian Spears:
Hi Craig, thanks for
having me. My name is Brian Spears. I'm the
Director of the AI Institutional Initiative
at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Our
institutional initiative drives AI into all of our
science missions at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. Our central concerns are national
security science. The principal one is stewarding
the nation's nuclear stockpile. Until recently,
I was the Deputy Lead for our modeling and
simulation in our ICF (Inertial Confinement
Fusion) program. That's the program
that we use to achieve fusion ignition.
Brian Spears:
That is, we got out of a nuclear fuel
target more energy by fusion than what we actually
put in by our laser driver. We did that at the end
of 2022. My background gives me the ability
and the privilege to work on that. It comes from
having gotten a PhD in mechanical engineering
from the University of California at Berkeley.
Although I was an engineer, my research was in
nonlinear dynamical systems and high-dimensional
topology for dynamical systems. So a bit of an
applied mathematician, and since I graduated
with my PhD and started at Livermore, been a
physicist working in the fusion space. So, no one
knows whether I'm a mathematician, engineer, or
physicist. I sort of like to defy categorization.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. The AI initiative,
how does that relate to the fusion ignition?
Brian Spears:
So, they're pretty
intimately linked. There are two pieces of
the world. So let me tell you a little bit
about the fusion and I'll tell you about the
AI and how they're coupled together. To achieve
fusion ignition for the first time, DOE, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory has spent 60 years,
six decades, going from the invention of the
laser to using lasers to compress fuel targets
with nuclear fuel in them to just recently, almost
two years ago, a year and a half, igniting that to
get more energy out than what we put in. To do
that we have two principal pieces of what we do.
One is enormous scale experiments. So the National
Mission Facility, the laser where we do this, is a
10-story high football stadium-sized facility that
you could lay three football fields across the top
of. That generates more precise experimental data
than most humans can imagine. The other piece that
we use is the world's largest high-performance
computing and simulation capabilities. So we
have tens of thousands of GPUs that are coupled
together to do physics simulations. So we can
literally blow up a tiny target with the laser
and we can simulate the details down to the
micron scale with picosecond or even femtosecond
resolution of exactly what's going to happen.
Brian Spears:
Now what about the AI? What do we do
with that? We now introduce AI into the middle of
those two things. So an AI model can be trained on
hundreds of thousands of simulations, the things
that we think the world should do. We can build
what we think of as a perfect AI surrogate and
that's fantastic, but it's still wrong. If our
simulation codes were perfect we wouldn't need
the experimental capability. So now what do we
do? We look at the experimental data, we take that
AI model trained on simulation, and we partially
retrain that on the sparse but really high
precision experimental data. Then that AI model is
now what I call an elevated model. It understands
the theory, the lay of the land, the way we expect
the world to work from simulation, but it makes
precise and accurate corrections based on the
experimental data. So now when I use that elevated
AI model, I get a picture of what I actually
think is going to occur in the experimental
facility based on previous experimental data.
Brian Spears:
That model we used,
both the simulation piece and the experimental
piece joined in that AI model, we used to help
make a prediction about what we expected to
happen before we had ever shot or fielded that
target that ignited. And that model on the weeks
before, the night before we ran it again, that
model said the most likely outcome was that for
the first time in human history, we would ignite
one of these things. We woke up the next morning
at 4:30 in the morning, the way you do when you're
anxious and you know a shot happens overnight,
and look to see and indeed that is what happened.
Brian Spears:
Now the AI was critical but we have
other ways of seeing this too. The simulations
by themselves were starting to say, [hey, this
is looking promising]. The experimental record
that we had suggested that we were also moving
in the direction of ignition and then we had this
new third way that was integrating both. It said,
[indeed, those things are consistent with each
other and you should probably start betting for
this rather than against it], which, after 18
years of not igniting something, it was pretty
satisfying to do that. We've now repeated that
five times and our models have suggested that that
would be the outcome. So we have this increasingly
confident predictive capability that we can detect
and predict what's going to happen the next time
we do it. Is it perfect? Absolutely not. We are
still pushing as hard as we can to improve
that process but we're getting real benefit
out of high-performance computing experiment
with AI as the glue that's holding it together.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. Does that create kind of a
loop that every time you do an experiment that
the predictions have shown would be promising
and there's some delta between the simulation and
the reality, that you can close that gap a little?
Brian Spears:
That's right. Every time we do another experiment
we learn a little more. Sometimes that experiment
is what you might call a success and the target
actually ignites. Then we use that, we can go back
and make the model better. Sometimes the targets
do not ignite and those are probably, in the long
run, even more valuable because we start to learn
that there was something that we didn't detect
in the experiment that we need to account for;
and we can usually go back and find that. Or
there was something in the simulation that we were
approximating that we're going to have to stop
and get better at, or we just weren't reconciling
the two of them carefully and those were actually
potentially at odds with one another. Now, sort of
presaging what happens in the AI world to come
in the future, The National Ignition Facility,
or NIF, can fire a shot once a week at that very
largest scale where we can ignite, or for smaller,
slightly less ambitious experiments,
sometimes we can do shots three times a day.
Brian Spears:
There are facilities now in the world that
we call high repetition rate laser facilities.
They actually fire at hertz. So you do the same
thing that I just described: make a prediction,
fire an experiment, look at that delta that you
talked about of the discrepancy, and then choose
the next place to go. But the next experiment has
to be planned 100 milliseconds later so you
can't have me make a decision about that. So
what do we do? We have started to train AI agents
to help us look at that outcome, the delta and
then choose the next experiment in order to make
the outcome what we want to be better. So we've
done this running hundreds of experiments over
the course of minutes or a fraction of an hour
far faster than what we could do at the National
Ignition Facility to prove these concepts out.
Brian Spears:
Now, the lasers that
go fast are small. They're very high powers but
they deliver a tiny amount of energy in an even
tinier amount of time. So it might be a joule
laser or maybe even up to a kilojoule laser,
which is a thousand joules. The National
Ignition Facility is a two-megajoule laser or
two million-joule laser and the difference for a
million times in energy is the difference between,
I can make something really hot versus, at
the National Ignition Facility, I can make
it hotter and denser than the center of the sun or
of stars. So we are not yet in a place where I can
take NIF and operate it at 10 times per second.
That's where we want the world to go and in fact,
if you do that, if you can get fusion ignition
to operate at about 10 times per second,
or 10 hertz, then what you have is a
commercially viable fusion energy source.
Brian Spears:
Now, that's a nice outcome
from the National Ignition Facility; its primary
focus is generating fusion conditions that we know
to represent key challenges for the nation's
nuclear stockpile and strategic deterrent. We
are using that today. In fact, on the very first
ignition experiment, we took what we call failure
mode diagnostics off of that experiment, we
put on a national security package and we
exposed a material we were interested in to the
conditions that are consistent with environments
we're interested in for nuclear weapons and
their applications. One, because we had the
confidence and we thought we could do a secondary
experiment there; and two, because once you do,
you can directly answer questions for the
stockpile that previously you would have
either needed codes to predict or simulations
(which are not quite good enough by themselves),
or you would have needed underground nuclear test
data, and we don't do nuclear testing anymore.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. And what are you
trying to predict on the stockpile?
Whether they're still viable?
Brian Spears:
We have all kinds of questions
that we answer about stockpile stewardship. We
make sure that the stockpile is safe: that it
is part of what we call the always never, those
systems should always be used when the nation
demands them, they should never be available to
be used if we don't want them to be, and what
we're working on hard is to have a very capable
strategic deterrent so that no one uses those
weapons across the world. So the questions that
we answer surround the way that materials age,
the way that they react to environments that are
harsh (that are filled with neutrons and radiation
sources). And they help us understand how to
design systems that have a longer lifetime, how to
reuse parts from the stockpile in weapon systems
that make us more effective as an enterprise,
and how to design systems that are effective
and safe for the strategic deterrent mission.
Craig Smith:
On the ignition,
I didn't understand that because there's this
brief spark where you're getting more energy
out than is going in. I thought the goal was
then to create a sustained fusion reaction
but what you're saying is you just want these
sparks in close temporal proximity and that's
enough to get energy out. You don't need a
sustained fusion reaction. Is that right?
Brian Spears:
That's right. So
there are two approaches to fusion. One
is magnetic confinement fusion and there,
the process looks a little bit like what you had
in mind. You want to squeeze the plasma using a
magnetic bottle, essentially, a confinement;
it's going to run for as long as you can keep
it confined (so if you don't have instabilities
that break up that confinement). That's going
to put power into the grid; you should think of
that a little bit like a jet engine. So there's
a combustion process with fuel coming in and
power going out, and it does what it needs to do.
Brian Spears:
The inertial confinement fusion,
or ICF approach, is a lot more like your
car engine. You have a brief explosion,
then you have another one, then you have
another one, and if it happens often enough
the average power that you get out is enough
to take that power and put it into, say,
a blanket of water and run a steam cycle. So
you would run a power plant just like you do
today except instead of burning a hydrocarbon or
fossil fuel, you're firing these targets quickly.
And because of the way that the systems scale
physically and what the economics look like,
you have to be able to do it at about 10 times
per second and you have to get about 20 times
more energy per implosion out than what we get
right now. So that number can sound like a lot,
20 times more than what we get right now, but that
is a teeny tiny bit. In fact, we're probably down
to about 10 times more than what we need right
now, the way that we have increased the yields.
Brian Spears:
We started in 2012, 2013 at
more than 100, depending how you count, maybe even
1000 times lower yield (or energy out) than what
we have right now. So we've come a factor of,
let's say 500, up from where we are. We have
only a factor of 10 left to go. That's really
not very far. That's for the energy purpose but
really what we're doing today, the mission that is
fully functional, fully operating, is the one that
takes care of the stockpile and lets us answer
real questions about the way our systems work.
Craig Smith:
Right. And on the ignition,
that last factor of 10, it's not only
closing that gap but being able to do
it 10 times a second. What is the challenge there?
Brian Spears:
The challenges are a few. One you got to be
able to do it with that kind of confidence:
that you think you can do it every time
that you pull the trigger on the laser. Two,
you need to have a laser driver that can operate
at that frequency. So I told you we have high rep
rate lasers that can do that. They can't do it at
the energies that are required to cause diffusion
ignition so you're going to have to get that
repetition rate laser up to the energy that can
do fusion or take a fusion energy laser and get it
rep-rated so that it can happen that frequently.
Brian Spears:
If you do solve that problem, the next problem
that you have is that you need a target in front
of that laser at 10 hertz. So that means you
have to have been able to build out a target
at 10 times per second. Right now our targets are
exquisitely scientifically engineered pieces of
micromachinery that take us months to build. You
got to get that operation down to effectively,
you can do it at hertz, and it needs to cost
about 25 cents per target or so and put that
in front of a laser. So there are hurdles
and DOE, the fusion energy science world,
is really interested in building out a successful
ecosystem for fusion energy for the United States.
So there's a really broad and vigorous startup
community. Lawrence Livermore is working with
those folks to share the lessons that we've
learned to make them more capable and to close
the gap between what we do on the science side
for the stockpile and what we've learned that
can then be taken up by private partners to
make that work for inertial fusion energy.
Craig Smith:
And you're optimistic
that that'll happen. I mean, is it just an
engineering problem or are there more fundamental
questions that need to be answered?
Brian Spears:
Yeah, that's the exciting part of
ignition. There was a fundamental worry, before we
ignited that for the first time, that there could
be hidden physics mechanisms or scaling issues in
there that meant that a two-megajoule laser was
physically incapable of igniting deuterium-tritium
thermonuclear fuel. That is off the table. We can
absolutely, 100% do it again. Now it's a matter of
quantitative degree. So then in that sense, yeah,
it's just engineering. Okay, but that engineering
is really hard, it's super challenging. You've got
to work on laser technologies, you've
got to work on target technologies,
you've got to put that capability inside a viable
fusion power plant, and we have partners that
are thinking about all of those things. So you
asked me if I'm optimistic. Yeah, I'm absolutely
optimistic, but you have to be an optimist
to work in fusion. That's the way it goes.
Brian Spears:
There's an old joke,
which anybody in the audience maybe you've
even heard, that fusion power is 30 years
away and always will be, right. Yeah, so that's
sort of trite and it's a little bit old. People
used to say fusion ignition is 30 years away
and always will be. But it's not, we did it. So
that joke is retired. So now you can make it about
fusion power but you can't make it about ignition.
Brian Spears:
What I will say
is that I'm pretty confident that in my
children's lifetime, we will see fusion
power on the grid. If you really pressed
me, I'd be more optimistic than that. But,
it's not a tomorrow problem. Because it
is “just engineering”, it's a matter of
will from the federal government. With
sufficient resources, the United States
can go do this. The current administration
has put out a bold decadal vision in fusion,
saying that in the next decade, we are going to
greatly advance this. With sufficient funding,
the United States can go do this. We can do it
first and we're the only country that can do it.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. On the other,
the containment fusion, where you
have a plasma that you're containing
with magnets or whatever; Is
that ahead of the– is it ICF?
Brian Spears:
Yeah. The convenient
terms for everybody to think of is, there's the
Magnetic Confinement, or MCF side, and there's
the Inertial Confinement, or ICF side. We are
complementary to each other. We will say the
magnetic confinement community is farther ahead in
the engineering. So giant machines like Tokamaks
are easier to imagine; they're further along,
they exist in the world. They're not yet fully
functional. They're not capable of confining their
plasmas for long enough to get more energy out
of them than what they're putting in from their
confinement scheme. We, on the other hand, know
that we can get more energy out than what we put
in by the laser driver, but then that would have
to be coupled to a really complicated engineering
machine that fires at 10 hertz and we're a long
way away from that. If there were four corners
of a 2D matrix, we're in opposite corners. What
really makes sense for the United States– push
both of these forward. We can lead in both of
these capabilities and we absolutely should. It's
what makes me optimistic about both approaches.
Craig Smith:
Are any other
countries as close or close behind the US?
Brian Spears:
Yeah. In the magnetic world,
there's a large international collaboration
on the largest project called ITER,
which is in Europe. That has participants from
around the world and that is the biggest, most
ambitious view of what you can do with magnetic
confinement. It's an enormous engineering project
and it's slow to come to fruition but they're
working very hard to do that. The US is a player
but we don't dominate that space. Absolutely
critical. My magnetic confinement colleagues
will probably say that they're at the forefront
leading that and that's probably not wrong.
Brian Spears:
In inertial confinement fusion, we are the only
game in the world. There are other laser systems
around the world that are under development. We
have partners in France that have built out a
laser system called the Laser Megajoule or LMJ
that is very much a NIF-like system. There are
lasers that scale that have been considered and
partially built in China and Russia is considering
a similar system. So there's a geopolitical angle
to the way that these are working out, some of
them US allies, some of them US adversaries but
we are much farther ahead in the ICF world
than the US is ahead on the magnetic world.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. Although,
this isn't a military technology. I mean, this
is for the production of electricity ultimately.
Brian Spears:
That's right. There's no military interest
in using our National Ignition Facility to take
that and put energy on some target for military
purposes. The closest thing to military uses is
the science that we can understand to take care of
the strategic deterrent, to make sure that we have
functional weapon systems that do what they're
supposed to do; that “always never” that I talked
about. Again though, the goal is to make sure
that no one ever uses these systems. They’re to
stay parked and dry where they're supposed to be
because it's clear that there's no winning outcome
for anyone should they use them. The National
Initiation Facility is part of that deterrent
mission. In fact, we use that to show the world
openly, [look how capable our scientific staff is
in this endeavor]. If we are that capable in our
open capabilities, you should understand what we
do when we're not telling you exactly what's going
on. So the scientists and the team that I have
the privilege to work with, we are part of the
strategic deterrent. This is what our nation-state
is capable of; everyone else should understand.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. One of
the things that interests me
about that is the simulation,
the use of the supercomputers or clusters–
I'm not sure how it's configured, yeah,
to do these simulations. So not only for fusion
research but for biotechnology research or
anything. Can you talk about the computers behind
those simulations? Are they physical computers
at the lab? Is it cloud infrastructure that's
being orchestrated? How can you describe that?
Brian Spears:
Yeah. So I'd like to
talk about two things. I'll talk about our current
compute capability and then where we're going in
AI to accelerate and transform the capability
for the country. Currently, the Department of
Energy maintains the biggest integrated precision
compute systems on the planet. Lawrence Livermore
has the most capable machine room for scientific
computing on the planet. For a feeling of scale,
what does that look like? There are more GPUs
and CPUs in Livermore than you can probably
imagine. Our largest machine, which will turn
on sometime, probably this month, being built
currently as we speak, will have more than 30,000
graphics processing units, or GPUs, inside it.
Brian Spears:
That machine room by itself,
which has more than a half dozen supercomputers in
it, pulls in 85 megawatts of power. 85 megawatts
is about the size of a power plant that pushes a
Navy sub through the water, roughly, for scale;
you can move a boat through the ocean at
considerable speed doing that. We use all
of that power and energy to do math really,
really, really fast. That math provides the
capability to do simulations at the micron,
sometimes the atomic-level scale, to understand
what happens in weapon systems, to do biological
missions of the way that proteins fold or small
molecules interact with biological systems.
And then those same systems that are great for
the high precision scientific computing, we have
engineered to be also good for the low precision
AI. So what AI really needs is not the high
precision, what we would call double precision
scientific computing. It needs lower precision,
but it needs it fast and in a repetitive way,
doing similar operations over and over again.
That's what graphics processing units are for.
Brian Spears:
The DOE has been at the forefront of
designing new architectures to do exactly that. In
fact, the GPUs that our tech industry and AI world
are working with today, much of that technology
has grown out of co-design between our vendor
partners like NVIDIA or AMD and the Department of
Energy, where we showed them where we need to go;
they've helped show us how to get there and we've
designed together GPUs for computation that is
more than just graphics processing on your laptop.
So it's something we're proud of at DOE and we
used our Exascale Computing Project, trying to get
to exascale, or 10^18 operations per second. We've
used that capability jointly, that co-design,
to build out this capability for the world.
That's great. How do we use AI? How does it drive
the future? So the computers that we have at that
enormous scale, so tens of thousands of GPUs,
each of those GPUs cost as much as a car. These
are sort of $30,000 kinds of commodities that
we're putting tens of thousands of them together.
Brian Spears:
Our next supercomputer is an order
of magnitude, a half-billion-dollar machine that
we use to do this compute. It does the science
but it also does the AI which opens up that
mission space that we open with. I can do all the
scientific computing on the simulation capability.
Then I can train a model on top of that,
admit that that's not perfect and then retrain it
and pull in the experimental data. But the same
computer that can run the science can also run
the AI on top of it. We're building out strong
public-private partnerships with companies that
are vendors, also with companies that are in the
software world. So we're exploring relationships
with names that you recognize like Google, OpenAI,
and other folks, all just relationships that
we're starting to build. We also have strong
partnerships with users of that capability to
help us understand what we also don't know,
like the GEs, the Boeings, or the Mercedes
of the world. So there's an entire ecosystem.
Brian Spears:
DOE is highly capable of moving
this forward but we can't do it alone. What does
make us special is the scale that we operate. So
here at the SCSP AI Expo, we have rolled out from
DOE an initiative that we call FAST Foundations
in AI for Science Security and Technology. FAST
is aimed at taking what we understand about the
AI world and scaling it up to US-nation scale,
being able to do things that are transformational
for strategic deterrent, for bioresilience, for
decision-making in the intelligence community.
What we need is the capability to build
frontier AI models on demand and at will
in the national security missions and we need to
be the first to do it. It's absolutely critical.
Brian Spears:
There's a global race on
taking that compute technology that we built here
in the US and doing transformational things with
it. There are adversaries in the world, especially
China, who have declared that they will dominate
in the AI space by 2030. The National Security
Commission on AI took a hard look at this around
2021, 2022 and they said in this global scale–
there were six structural features that they
looked at and most players in the world cannot
compete with the US, save China. China's ahead
in half the features. The US is ahead in
half the features. Who wins, is a toss-up.
Brian Spears:
So the Department of Energy has
stepped up and said we know how to do computing
at enormous scale. We understand what the national
security needs are for the country. We're in a
unique position to bring together the compute
capability and that awareness of those missions
and put it together and do something productive.
So FAST is the answer to that. It's a way that we
do four things for the country at huge scale. One
is, take huge amounts of data and do something
transformational, from advanced light sources,
accelerators, fusion facilities, you name, it
the world's best experiments, combine that with
simulation data; so data is one. The second is a
simulation and computing capability. We have the
largest computers in the entire world. Data plus
those computers, it's a really nice environment
to do a third thing, which is build out
transformational AI models. If you do all of those
three things: data, compute, and models, you can
make tools for AI that then transform the fourth
piece, which is critical applications. Those are
the national missionaries that I'm talking about.
Brian Spears:
So the FAST effort is
this very ambitious, whole-of-nation effort
led by DOE to go transform what we're doing
in AI. It will be pointed at things
like we started the conversation with,
at fusion. If we want to go get that for taking
care of the stockpile, we've got it now. We can
push up the capabilities to expand in new
ranges. We could think about inertial fusion
energy. We could think about challenge problems
that were unthinkable even five years ago.
Brian Spears:
There's a concept that we give
the name, “the one-month medicine”. How would
you go from seeing an emergent biology threat,
to the definition of a therapy for it, to the
production of that medication, to knowing it's
safe in humans on a timescale as short as
one month? We can't do that right now but we
can see a path. To do that it takes the precision
compute that we have, it takes the AI capability,
the joining of those two things, and you've got
to go to experimental facilities. If I can imagine
a molecule that might be helpful, I also have
to take an automated chemistry system and make
that goop, see whether or not it is just goop or
whether it's a useful therapeutic. If it's not,
then I got to go back into that loop and
do it kind of like the high repetition
rate laser. Maybe not at 10 hertz, every 10
seconds but can I make a molecule every hour,
every couple of hours, and not take a
team of chemists and scientists a much,
much longer time to make the first go and
then rewind it and have a much longer loop?
Craig Smith:
Two questions. One on
the models. Somebody asked Andrew Ross Sorkin,
one of the talk panels here asked, I think the
CIA director, whether the US is building models.
Whether it has its own proprietary secret model,
kind of a Manhattan project of AI. And he said no,
because the expertise exists in the private sector
and that the government funds the private sector,
the private sector develops these powerful models,
and then the government essentially buys
them back. But what you're talking about
with this compute technology, for example, at
your lab, are you building models yourselves?
Brian Spears:
We are. So let me be really
clear about what that question was precisely.
The question was, [are you building large
language models that are proprietary to the US
government in secret, that nobody knows about?],
and the answer was, no. I will say from the
DOE perspective, we are entirely uninterested
in competing with OpenAI, or Anthropic, or anybody
else making those kinds of large language models.
We're in fact legally prohibited from doing
so. We don't have any interest in doing that.
Brian Spears:
We are making US proprietary
models for all the things that are not language:
for not learning the grammar of English but
learning the grammar of chemistry, for learning
the grammar of physics, and building out maybe
even transformer-style architectures, which
are what's behind GPT and other things, but for
building out molecules for the generation of a new
alloy for advanced manufacturing, or new protein
for an antibody, or new small molecule for a drug
for cancer, all things that we're actually doing.
Brian Spears:
Those models are not secret, in the
sense that the question sort of intimated at
but we're doing it at nation scale and we will,
and we are doing it with data that only the
US has access to; and it is a transformational
capability. It's something that no other country
on the planet can do. Inside the Department of
Energy, we have a workforce of about 60,000
highly trained scientific staff. We have the
largest physical science database in the world.
We have the most capable scientific machines,
both experimental and computing for producing more
data, and our FAST effort is designed exactly to
take all of that data, all of our expertise,
all of our compute, and build out models that
only the US can have for US advantage. So it's not
quite as spooky as the question, [Is the US doing
something secret in the background?] We are quite
openly going out to seize global advantage and do
something transformational for the US, especially
aimed at satisfying our national security needs.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. And those models then,
would they be made available to the private
sector or are they for use in national security?
Brian Spears:
It's quite possible. Some
of the most exciting work that we've done has
been in public-private partnership with, say,
private partners like AstraZeneca for developing
antibody therapies. We are interested in sharing
those models. We are not interested in
sharing them if we think that something
bad could be done with them. So we will be very
careful and highly responsible about what AI
safety and security looks like. We're going to
respect everything in the AI executive order
and we're going to go out and do this super
carefully. So in the biology space, it's very
easy to imagine a model that interrupts biological
pathways so that you don't propagate disease. So I
want to stop a COVID-19 infection; great. The same
kind of tool could be used to interrupt biological
pathways that are critical for staying alive. I'm
going to have to think twice about releasing a
model that could be used for both purposes. Those
sort of dual-use ideas are at the forefront of
what we're considering doing and that extends to
all kinds of models. That's not unique to DOE.
Brian Spears:
When we think about
building out these AI models, we have to think
about what people with good intent are going
to do with them. We have to think about what
people with ill intent are going to do with
them. It's an open research question to decide
how to protect those models from doing things
that are harmful while enabling them to do things
that are beneficial. The Department of Energy is
in a unique position to see what is harmful in
scientific technologies, to understand what's
beneficial, to have expertise and understanding
what AI and high-performance computing can do,
and to start pushing the frontier of the
ways that we can release the beneficial
things without unleashing the harmful things.
It's not easy. So in our safety practices,
we do three things: we assess the risks
to see what we think the options are.
Brian Spears:
Can we do something safely or is
there a vulnerability? Second, we put in what are
known to be best practices. So we protect models.
We share them when it makes sense, we don't share
them. We may share data, we may not. Then the
third thing that we do is do frontier research
and understanding what is the next best thing we
can do in the future and we drop those into the
models and then we do that safely in the future.
Craig Smith:
This is an iterative
cycle that we just have to run over and
over again. Biology is a place where you
have to think about it immediately because the
access that people can have for doing good and
for doing ill with those things. But we have
to think about it for the nuclear stockpile,
we have to think about it for energy
production, for manufacturing, you name it.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. You were talking about transformer-based
models not necessarily language models, I mean
not trained on natural language but DNA is a
language and there are certainly other languages
in quantum physics in terms of codes that can be
configured in different ways. So is DNA research
one of the areas that this is being applied?
Brian Spears:
Yeah
Craig Smith:
I’m a layman
and in layman's terms, people get hung up on
parameter size because that's the measure that–
Brian Spears:
You can count it.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. Are they
larger than the existing language models or will
they be larger than existing language models?
Brian Spears:
They are not yet larger than the
biggest language models. So the biggest language
models are a trillion parameter class models.
So think about GPT-4, which is a 1.x- something
parameter model, and the similar largest models
are coming out at the sort of trillion parameter
scale. The scientific models that are aiming to
do similar things are far smaller than that right
now. The challenge is to build out architectures
that are useful; they might be transformer-based.
Before doing that you have to sort of create the
grammar, the language that goes into them. So
molecules like DNA, DNA is a very long molecule,
even smaller molecules, they're a really nice test
bed for doing that. They're a little different
than language; language is super linear. So we
have words that go from left to right in English,
across the page and we know how to read
them in sequence. A molecule exists in 3D
space and there are ways to project that into
something that looks like language, a string,
called SMILES strings but you lose the 3D nature
of the chemistry and that's really important for
the physics and chemistry of how atoms interact
in molecules. So before you build out these
enormous models, like you do for language, you
should start with smaller molecules and then
put a lot of effort on the 3D representations
of that. So we have a project called FLASC,
which is a semi-tortured acronym that I won't
recall, but the FLASC project at Livermore,
led by a colleague Brian Van Essen, is building
out frontier-level models for understanding what
representations of molecules look like. Can
we build out these transformer-style or other
architecture models that understand the chemistry
grammar, and then can do predictions with them?
Brian Spears:
But you don't only want to predict will this
molecule hang together, but you want to predict,
how do I synthesize it? What are the chemical
precursors that I need? What are the synthesis
pathways that I need to activate? Is this a safe
molecule to interact with? If it's not, can I
make small tweaks that make it accomplish my
goal but are also safe so that I don't have to
wear specialized personal protection equipment
when I handle it? Or if it's a medication, it can
be put into animals or it can be put into people.
Brian Spears:
So these models need to
come a long way to get up to the kinds of scales
where you see the sort of large language model,
GPT kind of behavior. But we understand what the
capabilities are. So we're pushing very hard right
now at the small scale to get the ingredients
together, just like we did with language models.
The Attention Is All You Need paper and the
transformer architecture was not built at a
time where we were doing a trillion parameter
scale stuff. We just understood that that model
was transformational and when you go to scale, you
get all of these amazing things that come with it.
Brian Spears:
We would like to
repeat that. Start with the chemistry case,
do it at small scale, build out the language
underneath it. We have all that data at DOE;
build those models at small scale and then go
to large scale. That FAST program that I talked
about, this nation-scale effort is part of the,
build it at small scale and then scale it
up to the enormous nation scale to give
the US competitive advantage that you
shouldn't be able to get anywhere else.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. On understanding
the 3D structure of molecules, Google
just came out with AlphaFold 3. And we
were talking yesterday about some of the
work that you guys have done on molecule
modeling. Are you beyond AlphaFold 3 or do
you use AlphaFold 3 when something like that
appears? Or is there some complementary
relationship between your research and
that research? And is your research public in
the way that AlphaFold 3 is somewhat public?
Brian Spears:
Right. So we do use
other people's protein folding models. Our
group that works on a project called GUIDE,
which is a partnership with DOE and DOD, uses
a model from Facebook AI research owned by
Meta. There's an open model out there that's
really fantastic. We build on top of that,
or really underneath that, the underlying
scientific data from high-precision physical and
chemistry simulations from what we call density
functional theory or molecular dynamics theory,
about the way that molecules stick together to
inform what proteins generated by that model
look like in terms of their capabilities, their
safety, a variety of other things downstream,
and we join that into a predictive capability for
models that we want to look at in the future. We
don't use AlphaFold or AlphaFold 3. The models
that we do have now have some nice features that
made them very usable. We will look at large
models like that in the future. We also, as
we just talked about, are growing some of our own
in-house models that we think have options based
on sort of transformer-style architectures to do
things that are like what AlphaFold and others are
doing but that are kind of specialized for the
missions that we need to go after. To the open
question, if we think that there's not a really
negative dual-use opportunity and we're really
confident that there are good benefits to be
had without ill, then we very often share these.
Brian Spears:
We will publish our
information about what we're doing. Sometimes
we will stop short of sharing all of our code
if we think we just can't be confident
that someone's not going to do something
really dangerous with it. There is no sense
that we're going to keep this proprietary,
just to keep it proprietary. The only reason we
will keep it is if we think that there could be
harm done with it. Our instinct as a federally
funded research and development center is to push
this out for public good. We share with private
industry as much as we can. We have a very long
history in DOE of developing technologies
and giving them away to the private sector
to scale up and build out for US advantage.
So if we can, we will give that to people.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. I just had a conversation about the National
AI Resource. Are you guys participating in that?
Is your compute infrastructure part of that?
Brian Spears:
Yeah, absolutely. So through DOE,
a good fraction of the computational cycles
that are available in this first round of NAIRR,
the winners of which were just announced, come
from DOE computational capabilities at Oak Ridge,
at other places inside the DOE national
laboratories. So we have a collaborative research
with NSF and with NAIRR. NAIRR is one piece of
the puzzle for building out AI for the nation.
That gives academic faculty and graduate students
access to slices of compute time where they can
learn what it looks like to operate at large
scale. They can start to build out science and
AI workflows and train a workforce and build out
their research in ways they couldn't otherwise.
Brian Spears:
What it's not
is what FAST aims to be. FAST is putting out
lighthouse or guide star problems that say, This
is what huge transformational science looks like.
Interdisciplinary problems at very large scale. If
you are trained to operate at the smaller scale
of the NSF, NAIRR funding, those skills can be
brought to bear in interdisciplinary teams to do
larger, more emergent things than you can imagine
operating at that other scale. They're absolutely
complementary efforts. NAIRR is fantastic and not
enough. FAST is transformational but needs
the workforce transformation that comes from
NAIRR and the things that academics can do with
that time. And together we build out students,
professors, national-level researchers that
can come into the national laboratories
and we can do transformational things
together. So they're very complementary.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. Do you have trouble in recruitment? I was at
NeurIPS in December and people were saying that, I
don't know if it's true, but people who certainly
know more than I do were saying that OpenAI is
now offering a million dollars starting salary for
top-level PhDs. I can't imagine the US government
can afford that– or maybe they can, I don't know.
Brian Spears:
Well, I don't make a million
dollars. So that'll be my first answer. It's a
tough competition. You can work in the AI space,
you can go to our private partners in the
world and you can make more money. That's
not debatable. You will do that. We do have to
compete with them. We do still bring in a pretty
steady stream of hires. We do that because
of the compelling missions that we have.
Brian Spears:
Let's say you
walk into our laboratory. What have I done
for the past two decades of my life? I've
used the largest computers on the planet
to operate the largest laser in the world,
using the most sophisticated AI algorithms
together to provide for the first time in human
history, more energy out of a fusion implosion
than what we put into it with the laser. That
sounds like science fiction. You can't do that
anywhere else on the planet. You would have a
hard time paying me enough money to leave that
to go do some of the other things; not begrudging
our energy partners, all the very cool things that
they do. What we have is the compelling mission to
work on. We have to use that to our advantage,
but it's not easy. Take my particular case.
Brian Spears:
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
is located in the Bay Area. We're a 40 minute
drive from the heart of Silicon Valley. Do we lose
people to our industry partners? Absolutely.
Is it hard to recruit people? Absolutely,
but we're working on it. Our FAST program is part
of showing the world what we do for good at scale
for US advantage and making a home for people
who want to do that kind of transformational
stuff. We cannot pay them what industry pays
them but we can offer a different kind of
compensation and we just have to be competitive
in that space. We will seek out, through DOE,
ways to pay competitive salaries. There are
things that we're thinking about to make us look
more attractive. On a dollar-for-dollar basis,
I don't think we'll ever win. It's got to be
monetary compensation and something else. I will
say that we've had people leave our laboratory,
go work at places like Facebook and then come
back. It's a pretty attractive place to work.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. Well, I
remember the National Security Commission
on AI was talking about these sort of,
I can't remember what they were calling them,
but national service programs where people from
industry could go into a national lab, work
for six months with some agreement with Meta
or whoever their employer is, and then go
back because they get a lot of knowledge.
Brian Spears:
Yeah
Craig Smith:
It kind
of benefits both sides. Are
those programs active yet?
Brian Spears:
There are pockets throughout the
government where they work. They work pretty well
in the cyberspace. They call them reserve forces.
Craig Smith:
Right
Brian Spears:
You would think of the
Army Reserve or the Air Force Reserve for
the military fighting forces. The idea is
exactly that. Instead of working for your day
job and then spending a weekend working for
your Army or Air Force Reserve training,
you would work at Facebook or NVIDIA and
then spend some time working at a national
laboratory, for example. That's one of the
most forward-leaning things that you can think
of. I thought it was pretty prescient of NSCAI
to suggest that and I'm a huge fan of the idea.
At scale that doesn't exist yet. I'd like it to.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. How do you feel
about the competition? I mean, everyone's obsessed
with China. I spent a lot of my life in China. Are
they doing similar things? Do they have the same
kind of national compute infrastructure that the
national labs have in the United States
or the DOE has? Can you talk about that?
Brian Spears:
Yeah, absolutely. There are lots
of comparisons we should make between the US and
China, some of which look favorable for the US,
some of which look favorable for China. In
terms of their ambitions. As I said earlier,
their ambitions are the same as ours. We will
try to lead. There's a concept that I call escape
velocity. My firm belief is that the nation
that first establishes a clear advantage in
AI for designing their science and technology and
national security capability will not be caught.
They will establish escape velocity. They'll be
out ahead. They'll be able to accelerate harder.
You cannot catch up to someone who does that. So
in my view the United States needs to be first.
It's a neck-and-neck race right now; so there's
no clear winner. China has said that by 2030,
they will be the clear forefront winner. So we
should think about everything that we're doing
at nation scale against that backdrop. Let's
look at compute capability as a proxy for that
conversation the things that we can. What
we can say, if you look at high-performance
computing. What we can say, if you look at high
performance computing, is that China used to be
a significant laggard in the number of high
performance computing cycles that they could
put together. Now they have more than half of
the computational cycles that you can rank in
the top 500 supercomputers in the world. They've
stopped, in fact, participating openly sometimes
in that conversation but we know that they have
the ambition and the will and maybe have already
accomplished having more cycles available to them
in high-performance computing than what we have.
Craig Smith:
What do you mean by cycles?
Brian Spears:
Cycles. Sorry, that's the ability
to do numerical operations. So each computer chip
can do some kind of multiplication of numbers,
some number of those multiplications every
second; every cycle of the clock you can do
those multiplications. They can do more math
than we can. We will also say, in the US,
that we do much higher-quality math. So there are
things that we can do at high precision that our
systems are capable of that in general the Chinese
systems are not capable of. So it's not totally
fair; they're a little bigger, they're a little
clunkier. Ours are not quite as fast but they're
much more precise in their capability. Ours
also, because of the DOE investment in computing,
tend to be far more energy efficient
than the general approach in China.
Brian Spears:
So right now we're having
a national conversation about data centers and
the amount of energy that they pull down. We're
reaching a place where data centers are going to
be starved by their capability to be powered. Some
of our hyperscaler friends are looking for ways
to co-locate as many computers, as many GPUs as
they can, without bringing the grid down in the
state that they operate in. Being able to produce
energy-efficient GPUs, like DOE has helped our
industry partners to generate, is going to be
an advantage in being able to power those with
an electric grid. So all of this comes together
in a picture that asks, how much compute can you
have. How much energy does it require? Does your
grid infrastructure support being able to put
that together? Can you do it in a way that's
not climate-destroying? Is your energy clean in
the way that you can produce it, or is it not?
Brian Spears:
This all gets wrapped
up into a notion of sort of techno-economic
competition between the two countries. It's
in vogue to talk about China as an adversary
in that sense, but it's very real. They're the
only competitor out there that operates
at that scale and they've clearly stated
they have the ambition to win that race
because right now in the compute world,
if you look at something like OpenAI has
done, they are turning power into GDP,
into domestic product. What you need to drive
that engine is more power into the grid,
more efficient computers for turning that power
more effectively into economic product. Don't
turn that off. Win that race. That's what we're
trying to do in the US. This is not lost on China.
Craig Smith:
Yeah. Is there something that you've been
talking about here that I haven't touched on?
Brian Spears:
No, actually you've guided us
through pretty much the whole experience of what's
going on, through the really wonderful SCSP expo
that we're at and the Ash Carter Exchange that
we're co-located next to. It's a good chance to
recap. One thing that I want people to understand
is that if we had our preference in the world,
the Department of Energy would be probably
called the Department of Science. We do
more physical science funding in the US than
any other agency. We operate at huge scale.
Brian Spears:
We have as our responsibility laser focus,
no pun intended, on national security missions,
from the nuclear stockpile to bioresilience,
to making very critical decisions
for the intelligence community. And
we do it with very sophisticated scientific
underpinning on both compute and experiment,
and now with a really leading capability in AI and
we're moving further. This fast effort is to take
that capability and build out a transformational
AI mechanism for the United States to make sure
that we get out in front, that we have escape
velocity, that we lead for national advantage,
and that we're not at a disadvantage on that
global scale. So I appreciate the conversation
that you led me through. We've touched on the
science and we've touched on the compute. What I
hope people who are listening to this take away is
that the US can do a spectacular, transformative
thing in this moment. We need only have the
will to do it, and I think we're very close.
Craig Smith:
Quantum. Is Lawrence
Livermore working or the National Labs?
What are they doing on quantum? Are you
a quantum optimist? I would imagine that the
compute power that you've been talking about
would be important in the simulation
power for solving some of the issues.
Brian Spears:
Yeah. I'm a quantum
enthusiast. In my view, quantum computing is
still a physics experiment that's very close
to becoming a computational capability. We
have researchers who are working on both the
physical side of building out quantum computing
systems and on the algorithm side of developing
algorithms for quantum computers to do the kinds
of scientific things we're interested in that
we've done with traditional computing. Kristi
Beck leads our Center for Quantum Computing,
which was just launched at Livermore openly, in
fact, last week I think. We've done the research
for a long time but we've got an investment in
making this a real path forward in computing.
So you should check her and her team's work
out, but I think it will be transformational.
Brian Spears:
It's not a today solution,
though. Today it's about GPUs,
lots of GPUs, how to power them,
how to take algorithms that they understand
today and make them work. Quantum computing
offers the ability to potentially transform that
for some types of computing, not for all. So we
need to learn what that admixture looks like,
the balance between traditional computing,
von Neumann architectures, things like that
and quantum computing and other ways to move
data to compute and vice versa. So I'm not a
pessimist about quantum computing. It's just
a future technology that's really exciting. Not
yet today's solution but we have absolutely got
to push on that. It is another frontier. Do not
be behind on frontiers, it would be a mistake.
Craig Smith:
Hi, I wanted to jump in and give a shout-out
to our sponsor, SysAid. SysAid's vision is to
lead organizations on a transformative journey
toward AI-driven organizational processes and
services, infusing intelligence and ease in the
workday with SysAid Copilot. SysAid orchestrates
service management across the organization using
generative AI that taps into specialized data
accumulated from thousands of customers and
millions of users. With zero setup required,
SysAid's conversational AI manages employees'
requests, assists with queries, and accelerates
the resolution of issues. IT pros and service
management leaders become pioneers, enabling
productivity to thrive. Now, employees can
do what they're meant to do and organizations are
free to fulfill their purpose. Give SysAid a try.